Setting up a new Ceph release
=============================

The next release of Ceph is codenamed "nautilus". We want to build and host
this in CentOS's system. Here are the steps to set that up.

Installing CBS client
---------------------

Please install the CBS client (CLI) on your system. You will need it to build
new RPMs and manage builds. Instructions at https://wiki.centos.org/SIGGuide

Configuring CBS
---------------

The first step is to open a `ticket <https://bugs.centos.org/>`_ with the
CentOS CBS administrators. The CBS admins will configure three things for us:

1. Create our set of Koji tags (eg. ``-candidate``, ``-testing``, and
   ``-release``).

2. Create our Koji build `target <http://cbs.centos.org/koji/buildtargets>`_
   (eg. ``storage7-ceph-nautilus-el7``).

3. `Configure <https://wiki.centos.org/SIGGuide/Content/BuildLogs>`_ the Yum
   repository "downloads" `site <https://buildlogs.centos.org/centos/7/>`_ for
   the builds.
   
Here is the nautilus ticket: https://bugs.centos.org/view.php?id=15269 (`A
script <new-major-release.py>`_ can file these automatically.)

Creating centos-release-ceph-nautilus package
---------------------------------------------

For each major Ceph release, we must create a "-release" package.

This process is `in flux
<https://lists.centos.org/pipermail/centos-devel/2018-November/017093.html>`_,
but basically we will need to coordinate with Niels de Vos <ndevos@redhat.com>
to create the new repository in GitHub for this package.

Once you have the GitHub repository location:

1. Clone the repository::

    git clone git@github.com:CentOS-Storage-SIG/centos-release-ceph.git
    cd centos-release-ceph
    git checkout nautilus

2. Copy the `centos-release-ceph-luminous
   <https://github.com/CentOS-Storage-SIG/centos-release-ceph-luminous>`_
   release package, and globally search-and-replace "luminous" to "nautilus".
   Note the ``.repo`` file is named "Luminous", so rename this to "Nautilus",
   etc.

3. Create the SRPM (see the instructions in the README)::

    rpmbuild -bs ...

4. Ensure the package is whitelisted ("added") to the three CentOS Extras
   tags::

    cbs add-pkg --owner ktdreyer core7-extras-common-candidate centos-release-ceph-nautilus
    cbs add-pkg --owner ktdreyer core7-extras-common-testing centos-release-ceph-nautilus
    cbs add-pkg --owner ktdreyer core7-extras-common-release centos-release-ceph-nautilus

5. Build the SRPM with CBS (see instructions in the README)::

    cbs build ...

6. Push your `changes
   <https://github.com/CentOS-Storage-SIG/centos-release-ceph/commit/2d27abb289727eaa98927805f9c2759ef974a0cb>`_
   to the ``nautilus`` branch in GitHub. This ensures we have a record of the
   code in Git for future modifications.

At this point you will have your first build in CBS.

Clarifying note: Our first build here is going into *CentOS Extras*, not into
our Storage SIG/ceph nautilus repo. The ``-release`` package is the only one
like this. It simply bootstraps the user's
``/etc/yum.repos.d/CentOS-Ceph-Nautilus.repo`` file so they can obtain the rest
of the Ceph packages.

Moving builds through -testing and -release
-------------------------------------------

When you build anything in CBS, the system will automatically tag that build
into the ``-candidate`` tag. ``-candidate`` just means that the build *could*
go somewhere, but it is not ready to go into a testing Yum repository yet.

Continuing from above, your ``centos-release-ceph-nautilus`` package will be
tagged into ``core7-extras-common-candidate`` to start.

To move this build into the "testing" repository, we will tag it into the
``-testing`` CBS tag::

    cbs tag-build core7-extras-common-testing centos-release-ceph-nautilus-1.1-1.el7.centos

Once the build is in ``core7-extras-common-testing``, the CBS administrators
will put it into the "testing" repository at
https://buildlogs.centos.org/centos/7/extras/x86_64/ . A cron job runs every
two hours to push builds to the testing repository. If you do not see the build
on the buildlogs.centos.org web server two hours after tagging in CBS, contact
the admins in #centos-devel.

To move this build into the "release" repository, we will tag it into the
``-release`` CBS tag::

    cbs tag-build core7-extras-common-release centos-release-ceph-nautilus-1.1-1.el7.centos

Once the build is in the ``-release`` tag, the CBS administrators will GPG-sign
it and put it into the main Yum repositories that are mirrored everywhere. For
``core7-extras-common-release``, this is
http://mirror.centos.org/centos/7/extras/x86_64/.  (TODO: figure out what
triggers this, and how long to wait).

Using the centos-release-ceph-nautilus package
----------------------------------------------

From this point our ``centos-release-ceph-nautilus`` package is pushed out to
CentOS' mirror system for CentOS Extras. All CentOS users can "yum install" our
build from CentOS Extras now::

    # Already done on most CentOS systems:
    # yum-config-manager --enable extras

    # Install our newly-released build: 
    yum install centos-release-ceph-nautilus

Now these users will have an ``/etc/yum.repos.d/CentOS-Ceph-Nautilus.repo`` on
their systems. This will point at the rest of our Ceph packages. These users
will be able to ``yum install ceph`` and get the nautilus package.

Copying the package list from the older release
-----------------------------------------------

At this point we have a ``storage7-ceph-nautilus-candidate`` tag that is
completely empty::

    cbs list-tagged storage7-ceph-nautilus-candidate

    Build                                 Tag               Built by
    ------------------------------------  ----------------  ----------------

We need to populate this tag.

First, let's find the list of **packages** that are present in the tag for our
older release (luminous)::

    cbs list-pkgs --tag=storage7-ceph-luminous-candidate
    Package             Tag                     Extra Arches    Owner
    ------------------- ----------------------- --------------- ---------------
    oniguruma           storage7-ceph-luminous-candidate        alphacc
    python-logutils     storage7-ceph-luminous-candidate        gfidente
    ...

Visually inspect this list of source package names.

Note anything that is end-of-life/unsupported. You don't want to carry ancient
unsupported packages over into the next major release. For example,
``radosgw-agent`` is really old and should not be carried along into nautilus.

Once you have copied and edited your list of packages for nautilus, run those
through ``cbs add-pkg`` so we are able to tag the builds::

    cbs add-pkg --owner ktdreyer storage7-ceph-nautilus-candidate ceph-ansible jq ...
    cbs add-pkg --owner ktdreyer storage7-ceph-nautilus-testing ceph-ansible jq ...
    cbs add-pkg --owner ktdreyer storage7-ceph-nautilus-release ceph-ansible jq ...

At this point you've set the package lists for your tags. Check them with
``cbs list-pkgs``, like so::

    cbs list-pkgs --tag=storage7-ceph-luminous-candidate
    cbs list-pkgs --tag=storage7-ceph-luminous-testing
    cbs list-pkgs --tag=storage7-ceph-luminous-release

Copying the build list from the older release
---------------------------------------------

Now that we've configured our package lists, we can tag some builds.

Let's find the list of **builds** that are currently tagged for the older
release (luminous)::

    cbs list-tagged storage7-ceph-luminous-candidate --latest
    Build                             Tag               Built by
    --------------------------------  ----------------  ----------------
    babeltrace-1.2.4-3.1.el7          storage7-ceph-luminous-candidate  koji
    ceph-12.2.5-0.el7                 storage7-ceph-luminous-candidate  gfidente
    ceph-ansible-3.2.0-0.rc8.1.el7    storage7-ceph-luminous-candidate  ktdreyer
    ...

Visually inspect this list of build NVRs (*name* - *version* - *release*).

As above when we were checking ``list-pkgs``, make a note to drop anything that
is end-of-life/unsupported.

*Also*, we also don't want to copy the ``ceph-12.2.5-0.el7`` build into
nautilus either. Remember, this set of tags is just for ``ceph-14.0.0`` and
newer.

Once you have assembled your list of build NVRs to tag from luminous into
nautilus, you can tag these into ``storage7-ceph-nautilus-candidate``::

   cbs tag-build storage7-ceph-nautilus-candidate babeltrace-1.2.4-3.1.el7 ceph-ansible-3.2.0-0.rc8.1.el7 ...

CBS will run a number of `tagBuild
<http://cbs.centos.org/koji/tasks?method=tagBuild&state=active&view=tree&order=-id>`_
tasks, one per build, as it adds each build into our ``-nautilus-candidate``
tag.

Once those ``tagBuild`` tasks finish, you should be able to see all your newly-tagged builds with ``list-tagged``::

    cbs list-tagged storage7-ceph-nautilus-candidate

Buildroots and kojira
---------------------

As we begin to populate our ``-nautilus-candidate`` tag, you will notice a
`kojira <http://cbs.centos.org/koji/tasks?owner=kojira&state=all>`_ user will
begin to generate a set of new repositories for us with ``newRepo`` and
``createrepo`` tasks. kojira will regenerate our **buildroots** every time the
``storage7-ceph-nautilus-el7-build`` tag or its children change. A "buildroot"
is a Yum repository within Koji that defines which RPMs are available when we
build any new packages.

You can inspect these buildroot repositories at
http://cbs.centos.org/kojifiles/repos/storage7-ceph-nautilus-el7-build/latest/x86_64/
. The ``pkglist`` file is handy to get a birds-eye view of what RPMs are in
that particular buildroot (yum repo).

Once we see that CBS's kojira has generated a buildroot for our
``storage7-ceph-nautilus-el7-build`` tag, we are ready to build Ceph itself in
CBS.
